---
title: Choice Poetics
subtitle: A Formal Approach to Narrative Choices
author: Peter Mawhorter and **Arnav Jhala**
date: Wednesday May 9th, 2018
---

# Choice Poetics

## Choice Poetics

- A formal framework for narrative choices
- Concrete language for choice structures
- A frame that creates edge cases

::: notes
- It focuses on discrete & explicit choices
- It includes a process for analyzing choices mechanically
- Defines parts of a choice like framing, options, and outcomes
- If you don't like formalism, at least it's interesting to look at the kinds of choices that don't fit
:::

## Choice Poetics

*"How does this choice impact the player experience?"*

<div style="width: 50%; margin: auto; text-align: center;">
<div class="fragment fade-out" style="position: absolute;" data-fragment-index=1>
- Agency
- Immersion
- Regret?
- etc.
</div>
<div class="fragment fade-in" style="position: absolute;" data-fragment-index=1>
1. What are the player's goals?
1. What outcomes are suggested? 
1. What impacts do they have on player goals?
1. (Afterwards) What were the actual outcomes? Their impacts?
</div>
</div>


::: notes
- The central question of choice poetics analysis
- There are many dimensions of player experience
- Agency is the one we usually think of, but choices can impact immersion, and might also be able to offer new kinds of emotion like regret, which a non-interactive work can't create in the same way
- At a high level, these are the steps of a choice poetics analysis
:::

# Mass Effect

---

- Video Example

---

- Screenshots

## False Choices

- Multiple options lead to the same outcome
- Desperate for the illusion of choice?

## Choice Poetic Analysis

\ 1. What are the player' goals? 

- Goals here

## Choice Poetic Analysis

- Blah Blah

## Choice Poetic Analysis

- Modes of engagement
    * Role-play
        - Develop your character

## Choice Poetic Analysis

- These "false" choices have extra-digital character-building consequences

---

Screenshots again

# Papers Please

---

- Screenshot? Video?

---

TODO HERE

# Appendix

## References

- [*Towards a Theory of Choice Poetics*](http://www.fdg2014.org/papers/fdg2014_paper_19.pdf). Peter Mawhorter, Michael Mateas, Noah Wardrip-Fruin, and Arnav Jhala. Foundations of Digital Games, 2014.
- [*Artificial Intelligence as a Tool for Understanding Narrative Choices*](https://escholarship.org/uc/item/1tn22145). Peter Mawhorter. Ph.D. Thesis, University of California Santa Cruz, 2016.
- [*Generating Relaxed, Obvious, and Dilemma Choices with Dunyazad*](https://www.aaai.org/ocs/index.php/AIIDE/AIIDE15/paper/download/11550/11355). Peter Mawhorter, Michael Mateas, and Noah Wardrip-Fruin. Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment, 2015.
